Come on.
Good one.
That felt heavy.
>> I felt heavy. Thank you, bro. All right,
we'll give myself 10 minutes rest and we
go again. Let's go.
just too lazy. That fourth rep was
>> The fourth rep was easy. I'm just too
lazy.
All right,
I'll tell you what. We're walking away
with six reps and we'll just pretend
that that last set
was good. Now, I know that when I put
that fourth rep back, um, it was like,
"Oh, I know I've got more. You silly."
Um, could I have done six? I don't know.
Like, if you look at that, you'd go, "Of
course you could have. You're a silly
Billy."
But yeah, if I'm being honest, when I
unrackcked that weight, you know, I just
don't like having second thoughts. When
I unrackck weight and I've got to go for
a big set, I just don't like having
second thoughts. And that's how I was
from the moment I unracked. It was like,
uh, that didn't feel as good as the
first set.
It felt like it was a little bit heavier
in my hands than the first set. Not off
to a good start. Uh, and if I miss that
sixth rep, I'm going to be annoyed. So,
anyway, it was one of those ones. Uh,
let's let's not and say we did. Uh, but
anyway, whatever. I'm still on track. I
got the six reps of my 180. If you're
following my programming, uh, that's
rotary periodization where the goal is
864.
So, so last week I did 8 on 170. I did
two sets of eight on 170. Today is six
on 180. Next week the objective is four
on 190. Now,
I've had um a little bit of a um
you know, I was mentioning before that
my I've been hanging on with my bare
minimum approach with my upper body
training. It's just been enough to just
hold on. So, it doesn't surprise me that
I didn't smoke those today. U maybe
that's the problem that I've come into
this session believing that I shouldn't.
I don't really deserve to be this
strong. But either way, what I've done
is not enough work. Uh my second bench
press session. All I've done is dumbbell
work. Usually I do heavy benches with
the boys. Um that's uh big Vasa and Ree
cult strength the cream team. And uh you
know normally we have our Saturday bench
press session but recently I've been
doing my heavy squats on Friday and what
happens after my heavy low bar squats is
I get penis elbow sore arms and I come
in on my Saturday session and I hold the
barbell and it's just too heavy. It's
too sore. So, I've just stopped. So, my
Saturday sessions, I've come in and all
I've done is a couple of sets of
dumbbell work, high rep.
So, bit of perspective. I did 60 kg for
two sets of 17 reps. Why 17? It's
because I didn't want to go heavier than
60 kg because it was just too sore in my
arms. And I thought for it to be
stimulating, I'm just going to rep it
out. So, anyway, I got 16 reps. Sorry,
17 reps. Waited 10 minutes. 10 minutes
rest. That's what I had just now, 10
minutes rest and went for another set.
So, whenever I'm doing my allout sets,
it's a common question that people ask
me is how long was that rest period? Uh,
today it was 10 minutes because I felt
like I needed it. That first set was
limit. I wouldn't have got the seventh
rep. I would have failed that seventh
rep, you know, and I'm looking back at
the set. I look at the sixth rep of that
180 and it wasn't a complete allout
grind. It wasn't an RP 10, but I at the
same time I didn't have another rep in
me. And that took a lot of effort. If
you know my benching style, I'm kind of
like fast and then I've got one slower
rep and then that's it. I don't have the
grind strength. Some people can just
keep grinding out and grinding out.
That's not me. Everyone's different. So
I feel like that was limit which, you
know, probably, you know, had me coming
into the second set thinking, "Oh, can I
perform two allout sets back to back?"
That's why I said straight up, I want 10
minutes rest so I've got a better
opportunity. And the answer was no, I
didn't.
Either way, um it's a bit of a lesson
for me that tells me to recalibrate. I'm
still on track. I'm lucky to be here.
I'm lucky that I got six reps, but now
this is my lesson that I need to learn
if I want to get my four reps on 190. I
need to do better on my second bench
press session, right? So, my typical
split for upper body is two times of
benching a week. When I say benching, it
doesn't have to be competition style
bench press, but two times of the
horizontal push pattern plus accessories
per week. Now, I've been doing this for
for many years, like ever since I've
been able to bench press, you know, 180
kg and plus. I've been on two sessions a
week. And I kind of preach that that's
the optimal that's the sweet spot.
But that's the sweet spot once you get
to a level where you're lifting quite
heavy. I started thinking more about,
you know, this is where we talk about
don't copy uh, you know, your favorite
lifters and how they program. They're at
a different stage of their training and
they're doing something that's very
different to what they did to get to
where they are. So, don't look at your
favorite lifters current programs. Look
at the programs that got them to where
they are. Now, the program that got me
to my 180 kg bench press was actually
three bench press sessions a week, and I
even did some programs of four bench
press sessions a week. I find that bench
press needs more volume than lower body.
So like deadlifts once a week, squats
once to twice a week. Bench press, yeah,
for me now it's two times a week. Um,
but what I've been is very lazy and I I
would call that one and a half sessions
per week. So that's not enough. That is
not enough. So that's my lesson learned.
Anyway, I'm not going to get too much
into it because I don't want to cool
down. I've got to do my accessories.
Last week on the incline I did 60 kg for
12 reps. So this week I'm going to do 65
kg for I don't know 10 reps. Um, let's
give it a go.
[Music]
Oh man.
So, the hardest part about that, I used
to be so good at passing dumbbells to
myself. Now,
I've just got just so much stiffness in
my shoulders.
It's hard to know what's causing the
stiffness is if it's the low bar squats
cuz after my squat sessions, my
shoulders are always super tight, you
know, and I kind of do very little
mobility work after that because they're
so kind of just uncomfortable.
So, it's the years of accumulation of
not much mobility work because of that
the demand of the pressing and squatting
every single week. multiple times per
week
without doing the mobility work. So,
yeah, I've slowly been doing more and
more mobility work, but you know, it's
like I used to be able to do muscle-ups,
no problem. It was the easiest thing in
the world as like, you know, slow
motion, like strict muscle-ups, no
swinging or anything like that.
But now I lack the mobility and it's
like I get up and it's like I can't I
can't turn around, turn over, whatever
you call it.
>> Human flag, right?
>> Human flag pole that doesn't require a
lot of shoulder mobility.
>> Do you reckon?
>> Well, I'd never tried it before and I
had crossfitters in my gym or or
calisthenics coaches in my gym say to
me, I'd love to see, you know, they
weren't doing it as a challenge like
they didn't believe that I couldn't do
it. They were genuinely curious to see
how my core strength
would carry over
to to flag poles. And the first time I
tried it was like a little bit off
balance, but then it was like it was
actually pretty easy. Uh but anyway,
that's different to this. Like my
shoulder mobility I used to the most
I've done is I've done 80 kg shoulder
press, but I didn't throw them up. I
think 75 kg was the most that I've
actually passed to myself. But these
days passing that weight to myself is
just like although I'm stronger, I lack
the mobility to do it. Anyhow, um 12
reps on that. I'll do another set.
Sorry, that wasn't 12. That was 10 reps.
Last week was 12 on. So, this is um
interesting discussion with how to
progress with dumbbells. So, most of you
at your gyms have incremental increases,
usually 2 and a half kilogram
incremental increases. So, let's just
say you're doing something like 20 kg
dumbbell press and you're doing sets of
10. What's the next increment up? It's
22 and a2. That's 12 1/2% increase. You
can't get 12 1.5% stronger from week to
week. So, therefore, like I like to set
myself up to be able to take 5% jumps
sometimes, right? So, 5% jumps and
that's a big jump, right? So a lot of
the times like humans don't get stronger
by 5% each week. So how do I allow
myself to be able to jump 5%? By
starting conservative. So I start with a
roughly a 7 RP. That allows me to have
room to go to an 8 RPA which is like a
5% jump every single week. Now either
way the incremental increases on
dumbbells are typically too big. So it's
more than 5% incremental jump by going
from one dumbbell to the next. So in
this instance here, that's what I like
to do with my dumbbells is when I
increase the weight, I like to reduce
the reps. So last week was 10.
Last week was twelves. 12elves on 60.
Today I did 10 on 65. Uh which was, you
know, just right. I wouldn't have been
able to get 11. Maybe it was that last
rep syndrome. Again,
for those who don't know, last rep
syndrome is something that I just
coined. It's like every time you know
you're going to do a certain number,
it's always that last number that's a
grind. Why is it because psychologically
you've set yourself up that that last
number should be hard or that that set
is going to be hard? I think that that
is largely the case. Anyway, so I had a
bit of last rep syndrome and then the
10th rep was a tough one, but I still
got it. Uh, one more set of that. Uh,
and then I'm going to do a whole bunch
of back work and arms.
Okay.
That feels good actually. One arm row.
They used to be a staple in my programs.
One arm rows
was my favorite horizontal pull pattern.
There's a few great horizontal pull
patterns. Bent over rows, it's a
favorite of a lot of bodybuilders.
However,
my biggest beef with it is my low back
is tired from squats and deadlifts. It's
not just as tired. I want it to be fully
recovered so that when I come back to my
squats and deadlifts,
I'm not having to recover from my upper
body session. So, I don't want that
overlap. I don't want it to interfere. A
lot of bodybuilders,
not all, some bodybuilders love that
exercise, get great results from that
exercise because it's an excellent
exercise. But a lot of people dismiss
it, the bent over row, because
it requires a lot of energy in your
lower back, in your posterior chain to
stabilize your body
so that you can target your upper back.
Logic says and science says lock your
body in position, stabilize your body
without having to use external muscles
to stabilize
so that you can fully fatigue the target
muscles only. So that's why doing things
like a chest supported row is considered
superior to a bent over row with a
barbell, which I agree with. But
something that a lot of the research
doesn't talk about is enjoyment of
exercise. Some people just love doing
these things. A lot of the times I
factor in whenever I'm working with
someone. I speak to my clients and my
athletes about if there's something on
the program that you just hate doing,
let me know and we'll have a discussion
and we don't have to include it
potentially. If it's a powerlifter and
you hate doing a squat, bench press,
deadlift, and you don't like doing
those, you either change the sport or
you suck it up and you have to do it.
But otherwise, if your objective is
bodybuilding, you don't there's no
single exercise that you must do.
exercises are just simply tools that we
use to strengthen joints and muscles.
And there are so many different tools
for that job. So the horizontal pull
plane, so bend over row, one arm
dumbbell row, chest supported row,
seated cable row, they're all different
ways of doing the same thing. And some
people love a bent over row and pendlay
rows and variations of that because they
just feel great doing it. And if that's
the case, a lot of the times when you
feel great doing the exercise, you end
up applying more effort and therefore
you end up getting a better result. If
all you do is exercises that you hate,
then you're not going to apply the same
amount of effort.
Therefore, you won't get the same
result. So, uh that's where when people
say this exercise is bad because science
says XY Z. Well, science doesn't factor
in your enjoyment and your ability. It's
not a bad exercise. It may not be
exactly as good as a chest supported
row, but it doesn't make it a bad
exercise. And just because something's
slightly less than another exercise,
doesn't mean you can't still build
muscle. You can absolutely build muscle.
And if you became that type of lifter
that could do bent over rows with
astronomical weights, you'd be massive.
You'd have a strong back. Your back
would look massive. You'd build all the
right muscles. Uh and uh that's the end
of that. So
for me, this one arm row used to be a
staple for my training. And then, you
know, since I got more and more into
powerlifting, I kind of categorized the
one- arm row similar to how I do with
the bent over row where it kind of
interferes. You saw that I had to set my
whole body up in a way that I was using
I'm using my core muscles to stabilize
my body so that I can target my upper
back muscles, my lats and my midback. It
does involve my posterior chain to a
degree, which is where, you know, I got
very technical saying, I want those
muscles fully recovered. So, it's been a
long time since I've been doing these
exercises. Um, but now that I've just
done a set of it, it's like, you know
what, it feels quite nice. Um, so it is
a great exercise. It is a great exercise
and I'll be including a lot more of
these.
>> One more set. We'll do one more set for
sure.
So that's another discussion is whenever
you do unilateral exercises, whenever
you rest, how long do you rest in
between? Um I like to rest in between
arms. So you do one side instead of what
I used to do was one side and then
straight into the other side and then
I'd rest whatever the prescribed rest
period was, 4 minutes, 5 minutes,
whatever it is. Now I do one arm and I
rest two to three minutes and then I do
the other arm and I rest two to three
minutes because although I'm not using
the same muscles like I I fatigue my
right side, there's still some central
fatigue that I need to recover from. So
if I do my right side, that residual
fatigue is going to interfere with my
ability to perform at a high level on my
other side. So big exercises, you know,
like a heavy one- arm row, especially
things like lunge patterns where you're
using huge muscles, um, you know, and
overlapping muscles. So when you do a
lunge on one leg or a split squat or
whatever is on one leg, you're still
using your core to stabilize your body.
And if you go one leg and no rest, right
leg, no rest, left leg, and then do your
rest period, the second leg that you do,
or the second limb that you perform the
movement on will be in a fatigue state.
So you won't be able to perform at the
high level. So when you're doing super
sets, try that. Rest in between limbs
and you'll get a better result. So I'm
just going to do one more set. So that's
two sets of everything. Two sets of
bench, flat bench, even though I didn't
complete the last sets. Uh two sets of
incline dumbbell press. Now I'm going to
do two sets of rows. And then my last
exercise is going to be a vertical pull
plane. Okay, one more set.
[Music]
You like that? Thank you. Thank you. I'm
going to show you the technique, show
you the things that I think about here.
I'll tell you what I think about. I
think about solid stable base of
support. A lot of people when they do
their rows, they know one hand, one foot
and here we go. Um, this is me
considering I used to do a lot of
jiu-jitsu. And with jiu-jitsu, we always
talk about base of support. I say we as
if I still do it. That was many, many
years ago. Blue belt, by the way. And
it's a very important to have a strong
base. And so whenever I was doing these
exercises, it's like, oh yeah, makes
sense. You want a strong base. So this
is how I have a strong base when I do
these exercises is I post my leg out. I
don't just keep them here narrow. I post
that leg out so it's a nice stable base
of support.
Right hand. So I position my body as if
I'm on two legs and two hands.
So this is the exact same. So if I had a
a bench that I was resting on, that's
what I would look like. But I don't have
a bench. So this is how I'm stabilizing
my body. And that's a strong position.
So, I believe that it's the strong wide
base that leg post that out wide that's
going to put you in the best position.
Okay, 10 reps.
I feel
left side slightly weaker.
How do I tell? My right side, the 10th
rep, I'm still able to touch my chest
with a dumbbell. The left side, I didn't
touch my chest. That's okay.
I don't know if I miscounted. That was
either 15 or 16.
I know it wasn't less than 15. The
objective was 15. And I'm going to do
another set.
So, I do lat pull downs most weeks and
phase by phase
I change the handle. So, check out these
handles. They're just neutral. Uh, last
phase, I use
this one, which is
which is kind of more pronated.
So, that's the difference between these
two. This is more neutral, just a very
slight different angle. So, it's an
interesting topic where a lot of people
say to follow programs, don't change
your programs so frequently
because you're stealing the
progressions. So, you got to keep on
your follow your program until you stop
progressing. So that's a very common
thought that's not unintelligent,
but the reason why people are talking
about that is they say too many
variations, too much variation in your
training is going to interfere with your
progression. Now that's based on the
assumption that the variations that
you're using are drastic variations,
but most intelligent athletes don't use
drastic variations. So that's the extent
of my v variation. So, I do lat program
lat pull downs in most programs. And
those are the variations that I use. Rep
range change as well as slight grip
change. I've gone from slightly pronated
to neutral. And then on the next phase,
I might go back to a slightly wider grip
pronated. And those are the adjustments.
Same with bench press. I'm always bench
pressing, but sometimes I'll use a
spotto press. Sometimes I'll use a
slightly uh closer grip. Sometimes I'll
do a flat foot with no arch. But I'm
always benching. Dumbbell pressing. I'll
go from a 30° incline to a 45 degree
incline or a 15 degree incline. So those
small adjustments from phase to phase.
That's the extent of my variations. And
I like to change my programs every four
weeks. And a lot of people nowadays say
four weeks is too frequent.
Okay, if you say so. I'm able to achieve
some pretty good results with myself as
well as some of my amazing athletes that
I've worked with that have achieved
world records. So, I'm going to stick to
what I know, which is uh you know, four
weekly programs. Um, but I'm not closed
off to longer durations. Now, here's my
beef with longer durations of
programming is when I write a program
for someone, I want to set you up so
that you can progress every single week.
So, with a four-weekly program, remember
what I said earlier, I like to jump by
about 5% in load every week. So, if
you're jumping in 5% load for 4 weeks,
you're basically starting quite
conservative to allow room for those 5%
jumps. And then by week four of the
program, you're at your limit. Like,
you're pushing it. And I'd say even kind
of what I like to consider is when I get
a program, I like to think, what do you
think you can do today if you're pushing
your limit? What number do you think for
these prescribed reps and sets for these
reps and sets if you were to push your
limit? So, get that number in your head.
I'm going to save that for week three.
Week two is 5% less than that. Week one
is 5% less than that.
That's how conservative I am on week
one. But then look at week four. It's 5%
more than what you think you can do
currently. So that means today, if I was
to write you out a program, the number
that I set for week four, if you were to
do it today, you wouldn't be able to do
it. I'm setting you up so that you have
three great weeks of practice. Week one
is quite conservative. Week two is a
little bit harder. Week three is pretty
damn hard and week four, that's when
you're pushing above your base level.
And then we repeat that process. Now, if
you were to do that with an 8week
program,
how do you set yourself up to be able to
progress for eight weeks straight? Maybe
you can, but what are the incremental
increases? So, this is where I say 5%
incremental increases. That works for a
four-week program, but if you're doing
it over 8 weeks, you can't you can't
jump by 5% each week. So, the
incremental increases need to be a lot
smaller. That's what you need to factor
in. Don't come in on your 8week program
pushing as hard as you can on week one
because what are you going to do on week
two? Progress. And how long can you
progress for if you're pushing your
limits on week one and you're trying to
perform a whole a program or a mess
cycle for a long period of time? I've
worked with a lot of people that follow
8week programs and they're up to, you
know, week four, week five and they say,
I'm already missing reps. My program is
really hard at the moment. It's like,
well,
that's why I like to do shorter programs
to set myself up. So, every time I come
into the gym, I'm moving forward. So,
you know, that's the next discussion on
how hard you should be training and
should you train to fail or not. Well,
if you look at my setup, week one,
you're not training anywhere near you
fail, but week four, you're getting very
close to it. So, I'm not on team uh
don't train to fail or yes, train to
fail. It's kind of like use a strategy.
Sometimes go to fail so that you
understand what your limitations are.
You know what fail is because if you've
never failed, how do you know how many
reps and reserve you actually have? So,
it's important to know your limitations
as well as it's important to get the
most out of your training and train
hard. However, if you do that every
single time you come into the gym,
you're missing reps every single time
you come into the gym. This is where
fatigue accumulates and this is where in
my opinion most people reach their
plateaus because you're trying to train
as hard as you can every time you come
into the gym. The analogy that I use is
to compare it to a marathon. You have to
run pretty hard and work pretty hard if
you want to do well in a marathon. But
that doesn't mean sprint as fast as you
can at the very beginning of the race.
You want to set yourself up so that you
can have a successful entire race, not
just the start of the race. So, if you
sprint at the start of a marathon, put
yourself in that position because I've
never run a marathon. I'm sure you're
not going to be able to hold that pace
throughout the entire race. That's the
way that I like to consider my
programming. Start conservative to allow
room for a strong finish. Anyway, I'm
going to do another set. Uh, and that's
going to be the end of my session. I've
enjoyed this session. I feel good. Uh,
even though I missed a rep or two reps,
don't tell anyone. Uh, with my bench
press, I still got six, which is what
the goal was. Next week, the goal is
four reps on 190. What do I need to do
to get that? I'll tell you what I need
to do. I need to step up on my second
upper body session and do a little bit
more work. Anyway, hope you enjoyed
that. Click like, subscribe, all that
stuff. And I'll see you next time.
>> I ask you a question if you want to
answer. Gym goers just show up with no
program and they do whatever they do in
the gym
>> and they always stop. Like they
literally don't see any results,
>> but they still showing up in the gym
expecting something different. Yeah,
>> there's a lot to be said about that.
This is a discussion on do you follow a
program or do you not follow a program?
Now, this is a whole new topic. Um, and
that is, you know, whether or not you
need periodization. So this is a debate
and this is a discussion that has been
researched and the research consistently
comes back that when your goal is sports
performance periodization
which is setting yourself up with a
long-term plan is superior to not
periodizing or just coming in and
training intuitively. Periodization
consistently wins. But when it comes to
hypertrophy the results aren't the same.
periodization or not periodizing and
coming in and winging the session is
seen as equally as effective as coming
in with a plan. Now, here's my take on
this.
The research is not done on high level
athletes. The research is done on
beginners and intermediates. And when it
comes to hypertrophy, the reason why
they say that the results are very
similar. Whether you follow a plan or
don't, you can achieve the same amounts
of hypertrophy. The reason is because
hypertrophy training is very forgiving.
What does that mean? It means you can
achieve great hypertrophy from a broad
spectrum of rep ranges and loads, right?
So, when it comes to strength, you have
to be hitting certain numbers to improve
in strength. When it comes to
hypertrophy, you don't. You just need to
achieve mechanical tension on the
muscle. And you can do that with light
weights and tons and tons of reps or
heavy weights and lower reps. Either
approaches can produce equal amounts of
muscle hypertrophy, which means you can
come in and you can get one athlete that
does very very heavy and low reps and
achieve great hypertrophy and another
athlete that does high reps and low
loads and achieve the same amount of
muscularity and it doesn't really matter
what program is followed as long as
you're taking those muscles to a close
proximity to failure and stimulating
muscle growth in that way. Now, my
discussion against that is here's a few
things. One is that research is only
ever based on beginners and intermediate
people with a very low training age.
Ever heard of newbie gains? If you're an
absolute newbie, you can do anything and
build muscle. You can do cardio and
build muscle if you're an absolute
beginner. So, you know, you can kind of,
you know, my daughter who's 15 years old
could write you a program if you're a
newbie and you'd build stacks and stacks
of muscle. uh you don't need to be very
complex as an absolute beginner, but as
you get more advanced, uh things become
more complicated and you need to have a
little bit more of a strategy. Now, this
isn't research, so this is pure
speculation. Uh but I still stand by it.
Now, here's the next thing. Uh there's a
big discussion on how often should you
change programs and people talk about
tricking your muscle into growth. Uh
that's a myth. So, I've heard people
say, you know, change the program every
single week. I mean that's where kind of
CrossFit stemmed from is you need to be
prepared for the demands of life and the
demands of life are very unpredictable.
So why would you follow a program? You
need to be able to turn up on any given
day and to be able to perform anything,
right? So people have that kind of
mindset and it sounds nice and logical.
However, when it comes to progressing in
the gym, there's a few adaptations that
occur with your body. The adaptations
are the way that you improve. One is a
cellular adaptation and two is a neural
adaptation. So to to put this simple,
the cellular adaptations are things like
muscle growth. That's changes on a
cellular level. That's increase in
muscle size is one of those adaptations.
Now that's not the first adaptation that
occurs. The first adaptation is the
neural adaptations. That's uh your
brain's ability to talk to your motor
units or to talk to your muscle fibers
and get them to work. There's different
levels of that. So one is called intra
muscular coordination which is your
ability to contract more muscle fibers
within that muscle. So an absolute
beginner so to contract your bicep you
flex your bicep. 100% of my bicep fibers
aren't firing here. Uh and I can't
maximally contract all of those fibers
uh voluntarily but the more advanced I
get the higher the percentage of that
muscle I can recruit. So that's one
neural adaptation. And another one is
inter muscular coordination, which is
your body, your brain's ability to get
So I'm doing a pull down. So it's my
brain's ability to get my bicep, my
elbow flexors and my lats and my midback
muscles to all work together to overcome
that weight. That's interramuscular
coordination. So those are the first
adaptations that take place. So when you
perform a new program, those are the
first improvements that you make. So if
you perform whatever weight on week one
and you improve on week two, it's most
likely because of the neural adaptations
or the neural improvements, your brain's
ability to talk to your muscles rather
than cellular adaptations. So week one
or the the early days, the first
sessions of your program, the neural
adaptations is what is behind the
improvements in your strength and
performance. And then the more you
perform that same program, the better
you will be at achieving cellular
adaptations, which is the muscle
hypertrophy. So if your objective is
muscle hypertrophy, you need to be
repeating that program multiple times so
that you can apply the principle of
progressive overload and start to see
cellular adaptations or muscle growth.
Right? So if all you're doing is coming
in week to week and just winging your
program and doing something different
every single week, you're never giving
your body an opportunity to familiarize
yourself with your program and then
improve on it and therefore grow, right?
So therefore that's different between
programming and periodization. They're
two different things. So periodization
doesn't mean programming. The program is
what I spoke about where you need to not
just come in and wing it every time. So
following the same program week after
week for multiple amounts of weeks. Uh
that's pretty important. That's where
you know following the principle of
progressive overload. That's where that
happens. But then the long-term plan,
that's what periodization is. And that's
where the research comes where it's kind
of uh very similar with do you achieve
more results with hypertrophy with
periodized versus non-periodized and the
results are pretty equal. I still will
always bias following a plan at the
highest level. It doesn't mean that they
are following a plan like it's set in
stone. The best athletes in the world
have a generalized plan so that they can
have some type of a structure when it
comes to timing on, you know, when they
need to spend time with the calorie
surplus, when they need to move into a
deficit, when they need to start
considering, you know, losing fat or or
working on a specific muscle group or
physical quality. It's a great way of
planning a nice timeline for the
long-term plan, which is different style
of periodization to sports performance
where we're splitting up our long-term
plan into building work capacity,
building muscle, building strength,
and peaking. So, these are the different
phases that performance uses for their
periodization. It doesn't mean that
hypertrophy athletes or aesthetics
athletes can't benefit from from
organizing their training into a
long-term plan. Anyway, that's a very
long-winded discussion where I've kind
of discussed the pros and the cons of
following a program. And of course, I
bias following a program. Uh, yes, you
can wing it. You can come in and train
intuitively and achieve some results,
but you're always going to get a better
result if you write out a plan. Anyway,
I hope that all made sense. I